---
title: Premature scaling – an entrepreneur’s worst nightmare
date: 2018-02-25 10:10:00
category: [MVP, Growth, Startup]
---

Premature scaling – an entrepreneur’s worst nightmare
Start-ups evolve through discrete stages of development, and each of these stages can be measured with specific milestones and thresholds.
As a founding team member, it is your job to reach these milestones and threshold before moving on to the next stage. Moving to the next stage to quickly is defined as premature scaling, which is the root cause of start-up failures.
The 6 stages of the start-up lifecycle
Discovery: Identify a problem worth solving, and who would hypothetically be interested in paying for that.
Validation: Focus on early validation of people that are interested in the product through the exchange of money or attention.
Efficiency: Refine the business model, and optimize acquisition channels and customer retention.
Scale: Fire up the acquisition channels and growth aggressively.
Profit Maximization: Focus shifts from customer acquisition to customer monetization.
Decline or Renewal: Product reaches the end of the customer lifecycle and needs innovation.
 
74% of high growth internet start-ups fail due to premature scaling
Moving too fast from one stage to the other is an almost guarantee for business failure. The science behind start-ups is rapidly evolving, and discovered already many interesting findings about premature scaling. Based on an analysis of 3200 of Silicon Valley’s high growth internet start-ups, it was discovered that:
1.	74% of high growth internet start-ups fail due to premature scaling
2.	No start-up that scaled prematurely reached more than 100,000 users
3.	Start-ups that evolve consistently grow 20x faster than start-ups that scale prematurely
4.	93% of start-ups that scale prematurely never reach more than $100k monthly revenue
5.	Inconsistent funded start-ups are valued 2x higher, and raise 3x more money
6.	Premature scaling start-ups have teams that are 3x bigger
7.	Inconsistent start-ups outsource 3.4x more lines of code at earliest stage
8.	0.5 to 3x as many customers are monetized by inconsistent start-ups early on

Although each start-up is unique in its own dimensions, research does show that consistent start-up behaviour increases the likelihood of success. So, what is consistent behaviour, and are there practical examples of premature scaling?
Consistent start-up behaviour
From the first graph, you might be surprised how long start-ups stay in the discovery stage. Most first-time entrepreneurs, and I made the mistake myself too, believe that you can complete the discovery stage in less than a month. That might be possible in case you have easy access to your target audience and are experienced in identifying pain points. However, on average this stage takes several months, much longer than you might expect, creating a pressure to jump stages that results in premature scaling. 
Funding vs. Start-up Lifecycle Stage
From a pure rational perspective, it makes little sense for an investor to bet on a start-up that is still in its discovery phase. Having 10-50k in the discovery phase, instead of a seed of 100+k reduces not only the risk for investors, but also ensure that you won’t get too far ahead of yourself. 
Consistent start-ups also do not raise more money once they reached the efficiency stage. After finding true product/market fit and having validated cost-efficient customer acquisition channels, only then it is recommended to raise a lot of money, and of course for a much better valuation. 
On average, consistent start-ups ($3,400,000) manage to raise more funding over their lifetime than inconsistent ones ($1,000,000). Investors are apparently capable of differentiating who is moving forward in the right way.
 
Team size vs. Start-up Lifecycle Stage
Another clear sign of premature scaling is hiring employees before being ready to scale. It takes 12 to 24 months to reach the scale stage, and until then the founding team should not worry too much about adding team members.
 
User Growth vs. Start-up Lifecycle Stage
Raising too much money too early will put pressure on you from investors to focus on growth. However, you will only 50% month on month growth if you consistently develop through the lifecycle stage and learn from your users accordingly.
Below is an average growth % per stage based on 199 start-up that did not premature scale and took their time to consistently evolve. This graph will be extremely useful for predicting and substantiating your growth figures in at an early stage.

 

An interesting finding on inconsistent start-up behaviour looks at the number of pivot. Start-ups that skipped a lifecycle stage prematurely will either pivot much more than consistent start-ups, or not pivot at all.
 
The goal of this article was to share a bit of science behind the process of developing start-ups. The above graphs can help you compare your progress against hundreds of successful start-ups and indicate whether you’re evolving in a consistent or inconsistent way. 
Please leave a comment below with your opinion about the start-up lifecycle and whether you think that bringing more science in to building start-ups is a good thing, or whether it will mainly remain an art.



